# Non.Parametric.&.Regression.Analysis.of.Sona.Reading.Data

## Abstract
It is interesting to try to figure out how humans learn. The aim of this study is to figure out which factors affect a person’s ability to read more quickly, and why they lose interest while reading. Hypothesis testing using nonparametric methods, the Kruskal-Wallis technique, and regression models are tools used for analyzing these social datasets. 
## Introduction
This study aims to determine the factors that affect Reading Speed, MindWandering, and Boredom, by showing casing several nonparametric and regression techniques. 
Dataset: Sona  (Sona) Systems (https://www.sona-systems.com/default.aspx). Participants read 3 texts (each from different genre: Informational, Narrative and Persuasive, coded as 1, 2, 3 respectively in the dataset). Each text is divided into 10~16 chunks (or screens on the computer). The reading time and word counts are recorded per person, text and screen. The context of the text is measured by five coh-metrics: Narrativity, Syntactic Simplicity, Word Concreteness, Referential Cohesion and Deep Cohesion. A survey (Sona_rating) was also provided to each participant at the end of each text to evaluate “Difficulty”, “Familarity”, “Interest”, “Value” (how valuable the text is), “Boredom” and “MindWandering” (whether they have a mind-wandering during the reading). The Reading Speed metric was not provided by the original data set. It was calculated by dividing Wordcount by Raw Reading Time. The metrics in the Sona dataset of the study are were not found to be highly correlated with one another, but there were many extreme values that fall outside the Cook’s distance. Therefore, nonparametrics methods were used, and this explains why the regression models created can only explain a small amount of that variation in the data (adjusted R2). 
## Methodology
### Hypothesis Testing Techniques
The main purpose of this section was to determine if there is a difference in Reading Speed between the different genres in the study. After doing an exploratory analysis of all three genre’s Reading Speeds it was clear that the study could not assume the data was normally distributed or had constant variances. This study used the Shaprio-Wilk test and the nonparametric Welch’s t-test to prove this. The p-value of the Shaprio-Wilk Test for all three genre’s Reading Speed was below .05, and Welch’s t-test p-value was below .05. Plotting the data also showed that all three genres had many extreme values in the data. This is why the study is a study on medians and not on means. Medians are more robust against outliers. The Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test is a nonparametric test that can be used to help find whether or not there is a difference in medians between the reading speeds of genres. The null hypothesis for this study is that medians of two samples come from identical population distributions, and the alternative hypothesis is that they do not. Each genre was compared against each other one at a time. Then a Quantile Regression test was used to check if the medians were different. A bootstrap method was also used for each hypothesis test to help confirm the findings of the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test. 
### Kruskal-Wallis Technique 
The purpose of this section was to determine if Reading Speed is significantly affected by a reader’s perspective on how difficult a text was. Each participant’s opinion on the Difficulty of the text was compared with their Reading Speed for the same text. Since the combined data of the surveyed data and Reading Speed data was found to have large outliers and possibly non-constant variances this study used Kruskal-Wallis instead of ANOVA. Kruskal-Wallis is a nonparametric test that finds if at least one of the Difficulty rating’s Reading Speed medians were different from another. To confirm the results of the Kruskal-Wallis test, the study also did a Tukey HSD multiple comparison test to see if any of the combinations of data resulted in a significant p-value for difference in medians. 
### Logistic Regression
The purpose was to find a good fitting regression model that can explain the different levels of MindWandering or Boredom in readers. Since both MindWandering and Boredom were both ordinal factors, a logistic regression was appropriate for this study. After fitting several models, this study used a function that found the lowest AIC logistic regression model for predicting MindWandering levels and also a model for Boredom levels. A confusion matrix was also created in order to use the results to get the accuracy of a model. Accuracy is total correct divided by total number of tries. The residuals were then checked to see if the models were good fits for the analysis. 
### Linear Regression
The purpose was to find a linear relationship between reading speed and the five coh-metrics that measured the context of the text. The five metrics are Narrativity, Syntactic Simplicity, Word Concreteness, Referential Cohesion and Deep Cohesion. After fitting several linear models using a stepwise AIC function, the model with the lowest AIC was chosen as the “best” model. The residuals were then checked to see if the model was a good fit for the data. 
## Findings
### Hypothesis testing
The purpose of this study was to discover if there was a difference of Reading Speeds amongst the genres in the study. The first test was to see if genre one’s Reading Speed is the same as genre two’s Reading Speed. The p-value for the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test was .005. A Quantile Regression test produced a p-value below.0005. The bootstrap 95% confidence interval showed that the difference in medians did not contain zero.  Another hypothesis test was administered to determine if genre one’s Reading Speed was the same as genre three’s Reading Speed. Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test produced .1493 as its p-value. A Quantile Regression test produced a p-value of .19.  The bootstrap 95% confidence interval of the differences of genre one and genre three’s Reading Speed did contain zero. Lastly, genre two’s Reading Speed was tested with genre three’s Reading Speed. The Wilcoxon Sum Rank test produced a p value below .005. The Quantile Regression test produced a p-value below.0005. The bootstrap 95% confidence interval for this hypothesis test for the difference in Reading Speeds did not contain zero. 
### Kruskal-Wallis Technique
The purpose of this section was to determine if Reading Speed is significantly affected by a reader’s perspective on how difficult a text was by using the Kruskal-Wallis Test. The Kruskal-Wallis test produced a p-value of .37. This meant there was no need to do a multiple comparison of the pairs of Difficulty levels to find which pairs produced different Reading Speeds. The Tukey HSD multiple comparison test was done anyways to confirm the previous findings. The Tukey HSD multiple comparison test at 95% confidence said that there were no pairs of Difficulty opinion ratings that had significantly different Reading Speeds (Look at plot provided in appendix on page 11)
### Logistic Regression 
The purpose of this section was to find a good fitting regression model that can explain the different levels of MindWandering or Boredom in readers. The study found that the lowest AIC model for predicting MindWandering is MindWandering = 1.4273 -.3625Interest2 – .6870Interest3- 1.2031Interest4 – 1.9789Interest5 – 2.8199Interest6 + .7537Difficulty2 + 1.1415Difficulty3 + 1.8771Difficulty4 + 1.7160Difficulty5 + 1.7930Difficulty6. The study checked the models goodness of fit to the data by finding the p-value for a chi-squared test of the residual deviances to the degrees of freedom. The p-value produced was .249. The second logistic analysis was on Boredom. The study found that the lowest AIC model for predicting Boredom is Boredom = -.8755 + 1.9051Interest2 + 4.8458Interest3 + 4.1836Intereset4 + 20.5515Interest5 + 4.38.70Interest6. The model’s goodness of fit was checked by doing a chi-squared test on the residual deviances and the degrees of freedom. The p-value produced was 1. The residual plots for both these logistic regressions looked like there were not patterns, but there were many extreme outliers. 
### Linear Regression
The purpose was to find a linear relationship between Reading Speed and the five coh-metrics that measured the context of the text. The study found that the lowest AIC model was Rspeed = .033918 -.0184Narrativity. The adjusted R2 is .001. The overall F test p-value was .004. By looking at several residual plots, it is clear that there are several outliers. 
## Conclusion
### Hypothesis Testing
The purpose of this section was to figure if there was a difference between the three different genres’ Reading Speeds. Genre one’s Reading Speed is different from genre’s two Reading Speed. The p-value produced from the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test was below .05, which means to reject the null hypothesis that the two genre’s Reading Speeds came from identical population distributions. Then the Quantile Regression test confirmed that the medians were different by producing a p-value below .05. Also since the bootstrap 95% confidence interval of the differences in genre Reading Speed did not contain zero, the study can be 95% confident that there is a difference in reading speeds amongst genre one and genre two. Genre one’s Reading Speed is not different from genre three’s. That is because the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test produced a p-value of .1493, which means the two data sets came from identical population distributions at alpha = .05. The Quantile Regression test also confirmed this finding by producing a p-value of .19. Also the bootstrap 95% confidence interval of the differences in the two genre’s Reading Speed did contain zero. Lastly, genre two and genre three’s Reading Speeds are different. That is because the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test produced a p-value below .05. This again means the two genres’ reading speeds are not from identical population distributions. The Quantile Regression test confirmed that the median Reading Speeds of these two genres were different by producing a p-value below .05. Also the bootstrap 95% confidence interval that was produced did not contain zero for the difference in Reading Speeds amongst the two genres. 
### Kruskal-Wallis Technique
The purpose of this section was to see a participant’s opinion of how difficult a text was affected their Reading Speed. The p-value from the Kruskal-Wallis test was .37. This means that the study does not reject the null hypothesis that the means reading speeds for all difficulty levels are the same. The Tukey HSD multiple comparison test also confirmed this finding by finding no pairs of data between the different levels of Difficulty that had significantly different Reading Speeds. (Look at plot provided in appendix on page 11)
### Logistic Regression
The purpose of this section was to figure out if a participant’s opinion on Difficulty, Interest, Value, Familiarity, and Genre affected their opinion on if the text caused their mind to wander or caused them to be bored. For MindWandering, the model that had the lowest AIC got a chi-squared test p-value of .249 for the residual deviances on the degrees of freedom. This means the model is a good fit for predicting MindWandering. Using a confusion matrix, it is found that this model is 76% accurate at predicting which level of MindWandering a participant feels toward a text. The residual plot is a little concerning, since there are some extreme values but at least there is not noticeable pattern in the plot. Further studies could do the study without the outliers or more data could be gathered to “fix” this problem. For Boredom the model with the lowest AIC was selected as the best model for predicting the level of Boredom a text causes a participant. The chi-squared test on the residual deviances and the degrees of freedom produced a p-value of 1, which means the model is a good fit for predicting the level of Boredom a participant feels from reading text. Using a confusion matrix, it is found that this model is 86% accurate at predicting which level of Boredom a text causes a participant. Again, the residual plot is a bit concerning. The plot showed no patterns, but there were some extreme values as well. Further studies could do the study without the outliers or more information could be gather to “fix” this problem.
Linear Regression
The purpose of this study was to see if Reading Speed could be explained by a linear relationship between the five context metric of the text. The lowest AIC model was chosen as the “best” model. Since the model’s overall F test p-value was .004, the study could confirm that the model was a good fit for the data. The issue is that the model is not very powerful. It can only explain .1% of the variation reading speed. Also the residual plots had many outliers. Further studies could remove outliers that fall outside the Cook’s distance or try a transformation. Future studies could also gather more data points to see if these extreme values were anomalies, or something else. 

## Reference 
Hadley Wickham, Jim Hester and Romain Francois (2017). readr: Read Rectangular Text Data. R package version 1.1.1. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=readr
Taiyun Wei and Viliam Simko (2016). corrplot: Visualization of a Correlation Matrix. R package version 0.77. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=corrplot
Hadley Wickham, Romain Francois, Lionel Henry and Kirill Müller (2017). dplyr: A Grammar of Data Manipulation. R package version 0.7.4. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dplyr
Roger Koenker (2017). quantreg: Quantile Regression. R package version 5.33. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=quantreg
Angelo Canty and Brian Ripley (2017). boot: Bootstrap R (S-Plus) Functions. R package version 1.3-20.
Davison, A. C. & Hinkley, D. V. (1997) Bootstrap Methods and Their Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-57391-2
John Fox and Sanford Weisberg (2011). An {R} Companion to Applied Regression, Second Edition. Thousand Oaks CA:Sage. URL: http://socserv.socsci.mcmaster.ca/jfox/Books/Companion
Venables, W. N. & Ripley, B. D. (2002) Modern Applied Statistics with S. Fourth Edition. Springer, New York. ISBN 0-387-95457-0
